docs/admin_api/user_admin_api.rst, before:

List Accounts
=============

This API returns all local user accounts.

The api is::

    GET /_synapse/admin/v2/users?from=0&limit=10&guests=false

including an ``access_token`` of a server admin.
The parameters ``from`` and ``limit`` are required only for pagination.
By default, a ``limit`` of 100 is used.
The parameter ``user_id`` can be used to select only users with user ids that
contain this value.
The parameter ``guests=false`` can be used to exclude guest users,
default is to include guest users.
The parameter ``deactivated=true`` can be used to include deactivated users,
default is to exclude deactivated users.
If the endpoint does not return a ``next_token`` then there are no more users left.
It returns a JSON body like the following:

.. code:: json

    {
        "users": [
            {
                "name": "<user_id1>",
                "password_hash": "<password_hash1>",
                "is_guest": 0,
                "admin": 0,
                "user_type": null,
                "deactivated": 0
            }, {
                "name": "<user_id2>",
                "password_hash": "<password_hash2>",
                "is_guest": 0,
                "admin": 1,
                "user_type": null,
                "deactivated": 0
            }
        ],
        "next_token": "100"
    }


Query Account
=============

This API returns information about a specific user account.

The api is::

    GET /_synapse/admin/v1/whois/<user_id>

including an ``access_token`` of a server admin.

It returns a JSON body like the following:

.. code:: json

    {
        "user_id": "<user_id>",
        "devices": {
            "": {
                "sessions": [
                    {
                        "connections": [
                            {
                                "ip": "1.2.3.4",
                                "last_seen": 1417222374433,
                                "user_agent": "Mozilla/5.0 ..."
                            },
                            {
                                "ip": "1.2.3.10",
                                "last_seen": 1417222374500,
                                "user_agent": "Dalvik/2.1.0 ..."
                            }
                        ]
                    }
                ]
            }
        }
    }

``last_seen`` is measured in milliseconds since the Unix epoch.

Deactivate Account
==================

This API deactivates an account. It removes active access tokens, resets the
password, and deletes third-party IDs (to prevent the user requesting a
password reset). It can also mark the user as GDPR-erased (stopping their data
from distributed further, and deleting it entirely if there are no other
references to it).

The api is::

    POST /_synapse/admin/v1/deactivate/<user_id>

with a body of:

.. code:: json

    {
        "erase": true
    }

including an ``access_token`` of a server admin.

The erase parameter is optional and defaults to 'false'.
An empty body may be passed for backwards compatibility.


Reset password
==============

Changes the password of another user. This will automatically log the user out of all their devices.

The api is::

    POST /_synapse/admin/v1/reset_password/<user_id>

with a body of:

.. code:: json

   {
       "new_password": "<secret>"
   }

including an ``access_token`` of a server admin.


Get whether a user is a server administrator or not
===================================================


The api is::

    GET /_synapse/admin/v1/users/<user_id>/admin

including an ``access_token`` of a server admin.

A response body like the following is returned:

.. code:: json

    {
        "admin": true
    }


Change whether a user is a server administrator or not
======================================================

Note that you cannot demote yourself.

The api is::

    PUT /_synapse/admin/v1/users/<user_id>/admin

with a body of:

.. code:: json

    {
        "admin": true
    }

including an ``access_token`` of a server admin.

Commit message:

further explain how to reset passwords

docs/admin_api/user_admin_api.rst, after:

These commands will require an ``access_token`` of a server admin. Make sure you read the ``admin_api`` documentation on how to obtain and use such an ``access_token`` (section `"Using an admin token" <https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/tree/master/docs/admin_api#using-an-admin-access_token>`_) before going any further.

List Accounts
=============

This API returns all local user accounts.

The api is::

    GET /_synapse/admin/v2/users?from=0&limit=10&guests=false

including an ``access_token`` of a server admin.
The parameters ``from`` and ``limit`` are required only for pagination.
By default, a ``limit`` of 100 is used.
The parameter ``user_id`` can be used to select only users with user ids that
contain this value.
The parameter ``guests=false`` can be used to exclude guest users,
default is to include guest users.
The parameter ``deactivated=true`` can be used to include deactivated users,
default is to exclude deactivated users.
If the endpoint does not return a ``next_token`` then there are no more users left.
It returns a JSON body like the following:

.. code:: json

    {
        "users": [
            {
                "name": "<user_id1>",
                "password_hash": "<password_hash1>",
                "is_guest": 0,
                "admin": 0,
                "user_type": null,
                "deactivated": 0
            }, {
                "name": "<user_id2>",
                "password_hash": "<password_hash2>",
                "is_guest": 0,
                "admin": 1,
                "user_type": null,
                "deactivated": 0
            }
        ],
        "next_token": "100"
    }


Query Account
=============

This API returns information about a specific user account.

The api is::

    GET /_synapse/admin/v1/whois/<user_id>

including an ``access_token`` of a server admin.

It returns a JSON body like the following:

.. code:: json

    {
        "user_id": "<user_id>",
        "devices": {
            "": {
                "sessions": [
                    {
                        "connections": [
                            {
                                "ip": "1.2.3.4",
                                "last_seen": 1417222374433,
                                "user_agent": "Mozilla/5.0 ..."
                            },
                            {
                                "ip": "1.2.3.10",
                                "last_seen": 1417222374500,
                                "user_agent": "Dalvik/2.1.0 ..."
                            }
                        ]
                    }
                ]
            }
        }
    }

``last_seen`` is measured in milliseconds since the Unix epoch.

Deactivate Account
==================

This API deactivates an account. It removes active access tokens, resets the
password, and deletes third-party IDs (to prevent the user requesting a
password reset). It can also mark the user as GDPR-erased (stopping their data
from distributed further, and deleting it entirely if there are no other
references to it).

The api is::

    POST /_synapse/admin/v1/deactivate/<user_id>

with a body of:

.. code:: json

    {
        "erase": true
    }

including an ``access_token`` of a server admin.

The erase parameter is optional and defaults to 'false'.
An empty body may be passed for backwards compatibility.


Reset password
==============

Changes the password of another user. This will automatically log the user out of all their devices.

The api is::

    POST /_synapse/admin/v1/reset_password/<user_id>

with a body of:

.. code:: json

   {
       "new_password": "<secret>"
   }

including an ``access_token`` of a server admin.

"<secret>" is the new password you wish to set (without the `< >`).

A response body like the following is returned:

.. code:: json

    {}


Get whether a user is a server administrator or not
===================================================


The api is::

    GET /_synapse/admin/v1/users/<user_id>/admin

including an ``access_token`` of a server admin.

A response body like the following is returned:

.. code:: json

    {
        "admin": true
    }


Change whether a user is a server administrator or not
======================================================

Note that you cannot demote yourself.

The api is::

    PUT /_synapse/admin/v1/users/<user_id>/admin

with a body of:

.. code:: json

    {
        "admin": true
    }

including an ``access_token`` of a server admin.
